Add Istio getting-started (#1243)
chainguard-dev/edu: content/chainguard/chainguard-images/getting-started/getting-started-istio.md

---
title: "Getting Started with the Chainguard Istio Images"
type: "article"
linktitle: "Istio"
description: "Tutorial on how to get started with the Chainguard Istio Images"
date: 2023-12-14T00:00:00+00:00

> lastmod: 2023-09-22T11:07:52+02:00

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lastmod: 2023-12-14T11:07:52+02:00
```

tags: ["Chainguard Images", "Products"]
draft: false
images: []
menu:
  docs:
    parent: "getting-started"
weight: 610
toc: true
---

[Istio](https://istio.io) extends Kubernetes to establish a programmable,
application-aware network using the powerful Envoy service proxy. Working with
both Kubernetes and traditional workloads, Istio brings standard, universal
traffic management, telemetry, and security to complex deployments. Chainguard
offers a set of minimal, security-hardened Istio images, built on top the Wolfi
OS.

We will demonstrate how to get started with the Chainguard Istio images on an

> example KinD cluster. To get started, you'll need docker, KinD, kubectl, and istioctl

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example KinD cluster. To get started, you'll need Docker, KinD, `kubectl`, and `istioctl`
```
keeping these in line with how the upstream docs render these

installed.

* [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
* [KinD](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/)
* [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)
* [istioctl](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/getting-started/#download)

{{< details "What is Wolfi" >}}
{{< blurb/wolfi >}}
{{< /details >}}

{{< details "Chainguard Images" >}}
{{< blurb/images >}}
{{< /details >}}

## Start up a KinD cluster

First, we'll start up a KinD cluster to install Istio

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

kind create cluster
```

> You should see output similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will return output similar to the following:
```

```

> ❯ kind create cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think we can leave the command out of the output here.

Creating cluster "kind" ...
 ✓ Ensuring node image (kindest/node:v1.27.3) 🖼 
 ✓ Preparing nodes 📦  
 ✓ Writing configuration 📜 
 ✓ Starting control-plane 🕹️ 
 ✓ Installing CNI 🔌 
 ✓ Installing StorageClass 💾 
Set kubectl context to "kind-kind"
You can now use your cluster with:

kubectl cluster-info --context kind-kind

Thanks for using kind! 😊
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Following that, you can install the Istio Chainguard Image with `istioctl`.

```

We usually try to end each section on body text, not command or output blocks.

## Install Istio using Chainguard Images

We will be using the `istioctl` command to install Istio. In order to use the

> Chainguard images, we will need to set these following values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chainguard Images, we will need to set these following values:
```

- `hub = cgr.dev/chainguard`
- `tag = latest`
- `values.pilot.image = istio-pilot`
- `values.global.proxy.image = istio-proxy`
- `values.global.proxy_init.image = istio-proxy`

> Those translate to the following `istioctl` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can set these values with the following `istioctl` command:
```

"Those translate..." feels kind of idiomatic here.

```
istioctl install --set tag=latest --set hub=cgr.dev/chainguard \
  --set values.pilot.image=istio-pilot \
  --set values.global.proxy.image=istio-proxy \
  --set values.global.proxy_init.image=istio-proxy
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The Istio Chainguard Image is now running on the KinD cluster you created previously. In the next section, you'll set up an Istio gateway and a VirtualService to test out this Image.
```

## Stand up a Gateway and a VirtualService 

> To see the Istio installation in action, we will create two Istio resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test the Istio installation, we will create two Istio resources:
```
I try to avoid using phrases like "Let's see" or "take a look at" or similar - I was taught to assume that every doc will be read by someone who uses a screen reader and maybe can't look or see.

* An Istio gateway serving the "http://hello.example.com" domain
* A VirtualService to always reply with "Hello, world!" to requests to the
  "http://hello.example.com" domain 

> Create a YAML file with the following contents to define the Istio resources: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a YAML manifest file with the following contents to define the Istio resources: 
```

I like dropping the lingo when it's relevant

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

cat > example.yaml <<EOF
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: sample-gateway
spec:
  servers:
  - port:
      number: 80
      name: http
      protocol: HTTP
    hosts:
    - "hello.example.com"
---
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: sample-virtual-service
spec:
  gateways:
  - sample-gateway
  hosts:
  - "hello.example.com"
  http:
  - directResponse:
      status: 200
      body:
        string: "Hello, world!\n"
EOF
```

Apply the YAML file to the cluster:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

kubectl apply -f example.yaml
```

Now, in one terminal, start a port-forward to the Istio Ingress Gateway:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

kubectl port-forward svc/istio-ingressgateway -n istio-system 8080:80
```

In another terminal, send a request to the Istio Ingress Gateway:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

curl -H "Host: hello.example.com" localhost:8080
```

> You should see `Hello, world!` output to the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will return `Hello, world!` to the terminal output.
```

## Clean up your KinD cluster 

> Once you are done, you can delete your KinD cluster with `kind delete cluster`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you are done, you can delete your KinD cluster:

kind delete cluster

This will delete the default cluster context, `kind`.

## Advanced Usage

{{< blurb/images-advanced image="Istio" >}}

```

Reviewer: This wasn't letting me apply the proper formatting, LMK if you'd like me to share that
